The Long Porter's Tale

There are things that are known only to the long porter of Tong Tong
Tarrup as he sits and mumbles memories to himself in the little
bastion gateway.

He remembers the war there was in the halls of the gnomes; and how the
fairies came for the opals once, which Tong Tong Tarrup has; and the
way that the giants went through the fields below, he watching from
his gateway: he remembers quests that are even yet a wonder to the
gods. Who dwells in those frozen houses on the high bare brink of the
world not even he has told me, and he is held to be garrulous. Among
the elves, the only living things ever seen moving at that awful
altitude where they quarry turquoise on Earth's highest crag, his name
is a byword for loquacity wherewith they mock the talkative.

His favourite story if you offer him bash--the drug of which he is
fondest, and for which he will give his service in war to the elves
against the goblins, or vice-versa if the goblins bring him more--his
favourite story, when bodily soothed by the drug and mentally fiercely
excited, tells of a quest undertaken ever so long ago for nothing more
marketable than an old woman's song.

Picture him telling it. An old man, lean and bearded, and almost
monstrously long, that lolled in a city's gateway on a crag perhaps
ten miles high; the houses for the most part facing eastward, lit by
the sun and moon and the constellations we know, but one house on the
pinnacle looking over the edge of the world and lit by the glimmer of
those unearthly spaces where one long evening wears away the stars: my
little offering of bash; a long forefinger that nipped it at once on a
stained and greedy thumb--all these are in the foreground of the
picture. In the background, the mystery of those silent houses and of
not knowing who their denizens were, or what service they had at the
hands of the long porter and what payment he had in return, and
whether he was mortal.

Picture him in the gateway of this incredible town, having swallowed
my bash in silence, stretch his great length, lean back, and begin to
speak.

It seems that one clear morning a hundred years ago, a visitor to Tong
Tong Tarrup was climbing up from the world. He had already passed
above the snow and had set his foot on a step of the earthward
stairway that goes down from Tong Tong Tarrup on to the rocks, when
the long porter saw him. And so painfully did he climb those easy
steps that the grizzled man on watch had long to wonder whether or not
the stranger brought him bash, the drug that gives a meaning to the
stars and seems to explain the twilight. And in the end there was not
a scrap of bash, and the stranger had nothing better to offer that
grizzled man than his mere story only.

It seems that the stranger's name was Gerald Jones, and he always
lived in London; but once as a child he had been on a Northern moor.
It was so long ago that he did not remember how, only somehow or other
he walked alone on the moor, and all the ling was in flower. There was
nothing in sight but ling and heather and bracken, except, far off
near the sunset, on indistinct hills, there were little vague patches
that looked like the fields of men. With evening a mist crept up and
hid the hills, and still he went walking on over the moor. And then he
came to the valley, a tiny valley in the midst of the moor, whose
sides were incredibly steep. He lay down and looked at it through the
roots of the ling. And a long, long way below him, in a garden by a
cottage, with hollyhocks all round her that were taller than herself,
there sat an old woman on a wooden chair, singing in the evening. And
the man had taken a fancy to the song and remembered it after in
London, and whenever it came to his mind it made him think of
evenings--the kind you don't get in London--and he heard a soft wind
going idly over the moor and the bumble-bees in a hurry, and forgot
the noise of the traffic. And always, whenever he heard men speak of
Time, he grudged to Time most this song. Once afterwards he went to
that Northern moor again and found the tiny valley, but there was no
old woman in the garden, and no one was singing a song. And either
regret for the song that the old woman had sung, on a summer evening
twenty years away and daily receding, troubled his mind, or else the
wearisome work that he did in London, for he worked for a great firm
that was perfectly useless; and he grew old early, as men do in
cities. And at last, when melancholy brought only regret and the
uselessness of his work gained round him with age, he decided to
consult a magician. So to a magician he went and told him his
troubles, and particularly he told him how he had heard the song. "And
now," he said, "it is nowhere in the world."

"Of course it is not in the world," the magician said, "but over the
Edge of the World you may easily find it." And he told the man that he
was suffering from flux of time and recommended a day at the Edge of
the World. Jones asked what part of the Edge of the World he should go
to, and the magician had heard Tong Tong Tarrup well spoken of; so he
paid him, as is usual, in opals, and started at once on the journey.
The ways to that town are winding; he took the ticket at Victoria
Station that they only give if they know you: he went past Bleth: he
went along the Hills of Neol-Hungar and came to the Gap of Poy. All
these are in that part of the world that pertains to the fields we
know; but beyond the Gap of Poy on those ordinary plains, that so
closely resemble Sussex, one first meets the unlikely. A line of
common grey hills, the Hills of Sneg, may be seen at the edge of the
plain from the Gap of Poy; it is there that the incredible begins,
infrequently at first, but happening more and more as you go up the
hills. For instance, descending once into Poy Plains, the first thing
that I saw was an ordinary shepherd watching a flock of ordinary
sheep. I looked at them for some time and nothing happened, when,
without a word, one of the sheep walked up to the shepherd and
borrowed his pipe and smoked it--an incident that struck me as
unlikely; but in the Hills of Sneg I met an honest politician. Over
these plains went Jones and over the Hills of Sneg, meeting at first
unlikely things, and then incredible things, till he came to the long
slope beyond the hills that leads up to the Edge of the World, and
where, as all guidebooks tell, anything may happen. You might at the
foot of this slope see here and there things that could conceivably
occur in the fields we know; but soon these disappeared, and the
traveller saw nothing but fabulous beasts, browsing on flowers as
astounding as themselves, and rocks so distorted that their shapes had
clearly a meaning, being too startling to be accidental. Even the
trees were shockingly unfamiliar, they had so much to say, and they
leant over to one another whenever they spoke and struck grotesque
attitudes and leered. Jones saw two fir-trees fighting. The effect of
these scenes on his nerves was very severe; still he climbed on, and
was much cheered at last by the sight of a primrose, the only familiar
thing he had seen for hours, but it whistled and skipped away. He saw
the unicorns in their secret valley. Then night in a sinister way
slipped over the sky, and there shone not only the stars, but lesser
and greater moons, and he heard dragons rattling in the dark.

With dawn there appeared above him among its amazing crags the town of
Tong Tong Tarrup, with the light on its frozen stairs, a tiny cluster
of houses far up in the sky. He was on the steep mountain now: great
mists were leaving it slowly, and revealing, as they trailed away,
more and more astonishing things. Before the mist had all gone he
heard quite near him, on what he had thought was bare mountain, the
sound of a heavy galloping on turf. He had come to the plateau of the
centaurs. And all at once he saw them in the mist: there they were,
the children of fable, five enormous centaurs. Had he paused on
account of any astonishment he had not come so far: he strode on over
the plateau, and came quite near to the centaurs. It is never the
centaurs' wont to notice men; they pawed the ground and shouted to one
another in Greek, but they said no word to him. Nevertheless they
turned and stared at him when he left them, and when he had crossed
the plateau and still went on, all five of them cantered after to the
edge of their green land; for above the high green plateau of the
centaurs is nothing but naked mountains, and the last green thing that
is seen by the mountaineer as he travels to Tong Tong Tarrup is the
grass that the centaurs trample. He came into the snow fields that the
mountain wears like a cape, its head being bare above it, and still
climbed on. The centaurs watched him with increasing wonder.

Not even fabulous beasts were near him now, nor strange demoniac
trees--nothing but snow and the clean bare crag above it on which was
Tong Tong Tarrup. All day he climbed and evening found him above the
snow-line; and soon he came to the stairway cut in the rock and in
sight of that grizzled man, the long porter of Tong Tong Tarrup,
sitting mumbling amazing memories to himself and expecting in vain
from the stranger a gift of bash.

It seems that as soon as the stranger arrived at the bastion gateway,
tired though he was, he demanded lodgings at once that commanded a
good view of the Edge of the World. But the long porter, that grizzled
man, disappointed of his bash, demanded the stranger's story to add to
his memories before he would show him the way. And this is the story,
if the long porter has told me the truth and if his memory is still
what it was. And when the story was told, the grizzled man arose, and,
dangling his musical keys, went up through door after door and by many
stairs and led the stranger to the top-most house, the highest roof in
the world, and in its parlour showed him the parlour window. There the
tired stranger sat down in a chair and gazed out of the window sheer
over the Edge of the World. The window was shut, and in its glittering
panes the twilight of the World's Edge blazed and danced, partly like
glow-worms' lamps and partly like the sea; it went by rippling, full
of wonderful moons. But the traveller did not look at the wonderful
moons. For from the abyss there grew with their roots in far
constellations a row of hollyhocks, and amongst them a small green
garden quivered and trembled as scenes tremble in water; higher up,
ling in bloom was floating upon the twilight, more and more floated up
till all the twilight was purple; the little green garden low down was
hung in the midst of it. And the garden down below, and the ling all
round it, seemed all to be trembling and drifting on a song. For the
twilight was full of a song that sang and rang along the edges of the
World, and the green garden and the ling seemed to flicker and ripple
with it as the song rose and fell, and an old woman was singing it
down in the garden. A bumble-bee sailed across from over the Edge of
the World. And the song that was lapping there against the coasts of
the World, and to which the stars were dancing, was the same that he
had heard the old woman sing long since down in the valley in the
midst of the Northern moor.

But that grizzled man, the long porter, would not let the stranger
stay, because he brought him no bash, and impatiently he shouldered
him away, himself not troubling to glance through the World's
outermost window, for the lands that Time afflicts and the spaces that
Time knows not are all one to that grizzled man, and the bash that he
eats more profoundly astounds his mind than anything man can show him
either in the World we know or over the Edge. And, bitterly
protesting, the traveller went back and down again to the World.

                      .     .     .     .     .

Accustomed as I am to the incredible from knowing the Edge of the
World, the story presents difficulties to me. Yet it may be that the
devastation wrought by Time is merely local, and that outside the
scope of his destruction old songs are still being sung by those that
we deem dead. I try to hope so. And yet the more I investigate the
story that the long porter told me in the town of Tong Tong Tarrup the
more plausible the alternative theory appears--that that grizzled man
is a liar.
